if you're over 60 this one small habit could silently raise your risk of a
stroke while you sleep no warning no pain just one moment you're fine and the
next you can't lift your arm your speech is slurred or your balance is gone as a
brain doctor I've seen far too many older adults go through this and not because
of smoking poor diet or lack of exercise but because of something they thought
was helping vitamins yes really vitamins every day millions of seniors take
supplements hoping to protect their bones boost their energy or keep their
memory sharp and while many do help some especially in high doses or taken at
the wrong time can quietly put your brain in danger today I want to walk you
through five common vitamins that may increase your risk of stroke brain bleeds
or blood pressure spikes especially during the early morning hours when your
brain is most vulnerable if you've ever taken vitamin D E B6 A or nascins this
video might just save your life before we begin I'd love to know have you ever
questioned whether your vitamins could be doing harm type one in the comments if
you're curious to learn more type zero if this is all new to you and if brain
health matters to you or someone you love don't forget to like this video and
subscribe to Health 365 for honest sciencebacked tips made especially for older
adults now let's start with the most surprising one of all vitamin D what you
don't know about it could turn a good night's sleep into a dangerous one you've
probably heard that it's good for your bones your mood even your immune system
and that's all true in moderation but here's something most seniors are never
told too much vitamin D especially taken at night can quietly raise your risk of
stroke i know that sounds shocking but I've seen it with my own patients take Mr
walter for example a 74year-old retired Navy vet he was sharp disciplined and
took his health seriously every morning like clockwork he lined up his
supplements including a 10,000 IU vitamin D capsule he bought over the counter
he believed he was protecting his bones but what he didn't realize was that this
simple routine was slowly pushing his body toward a silent disaster one morning
his wife found him confused he couldn't speak clearly his right arm hung limp a
stroke overnight his labs showed dangerously high calcium levels stiff arteries
and blood pressure all over the place the culprit vitamin D toxicity you see
when you take high doses of vitamin D especially without medical guidance it
causes calcium to build up in your bloodstream and your body doesn't know what
to do with all that extra calcium so it sends it into your arteries making them
stiff and narrow and guess where that can lead a blood clot straight to your
brain as we get older our arteries naturally lose flexibility add in dehydration
poor sleep and a calcium spike at night and you've created a perfect storm for
stroke the scariest part there are no warning signs you go to bed feeling fine
and wake up with your life forever changed and here's something you may not know
many over-the-counter vitamin D supplements in the US contain far more than
older adults actually need 5,000 Tyler's IU 10,000 IU people take these every
day thinking more is better but studies show that even 2,000 IU daily may be too
much if you're not deficient let me say this clearly if you're taking vitamin D
especially along with calcium or heart medications it is crucial to get your
blood levels checked regularly and always take it in the morning not before bed
do you know how many IUs your supplement has type D in the comments if you're
taking vitamin D right now let's open the conversation and if this made you
think twice give this video a like to help others find it too now if that
surprised you just wait the next vitamin is one many people take for heart
health but in older adults it can lead to something even more dangerous than a
clot a brain bleed let's talk about vitamin E vitamin E often called the heart
helper if you've been taking it for years you're not alone many people over 60
add vitamin E to their routine hoping it'll support their heart improve
circulation maybe even boost memory and skin health but here's the part that
doesn't make it onto the bottle label too much vitamin E especially when
combined with common heart medications can increase your risk of bleeding in the
brain yes even if you're doing everything right let me share a story I'll never
forget mrs evelyn Brooks 81 a retired librarian from Ohio she was sharp witty
and always had a book in hand she had a heart valve issue and was on warfarin a
common blood thinner her doctors monitored everything closely her blood work was
fine her pressure was stable but one day she picked up a bottle of natural
vitamin E she saw advertised in a magazine 800 IU per capsule i thought it would
help my memory and circulation she told me three weeks later she was rushed to
the ER with a terrible headache confusion and vomiting a brain scan showed a
hemorrhagic stroke bleeding inside the brain not because of high blood pressure
not because of a fall but because the combination of warfarin and highdosese
vitamin E had made her blood too thin to clot just one fragile vessel in her
brain gave way here's what most people don't realize vitamin E in high doses
works like a natural anti-coagulant that means it slows clotting if you're
already on aspirin Plavix or any blood thinner and then add vitamin E your risk
of internal bleeding quietly goes up especially in the brain where even a small
bleed can steal your speech your memory or your ability to walk and get this the
recommended daily intake for older adults is just 15 mg about 22 IU yet most
supplements on storeshelves contain 200 400 even 1,000 IU per capsule no
warnings no consultations and many folks take them every day for years mrs
evelyn survived but she now walks with a cane her short-term memory was never
quite the same she told me through tears i just wanted to help myself i didn't
know I was doing harm and that's the part that breaks my heart because she's not
alone so many seniors think if it's a vitamin it must be safe but the truth is
not every vitamin is safe especially when you're on heart or blood pressure meds
you must talk to your doctor before adding anything new now if the idea of a
brain bleed wasn't scary enough there's another vitamin people take for nerve
support and energy that can quietly damage your nerves and sometimes permanently
let's talk about vitamin B6 vitamin B6 the one often labeled as a nerve support
or brain booster you might have seen it in those bottles at the pharmacy
claiming to help with energy focus or even memory and maybe someone even told
you it's good for aging nerves but here's what most seniors are never warned
about too much vitamin B6 can actually damage your nerves sometimes permanently
let me tell you about Mr harold Jenkins he was 76 a retired truck driver from
Kansas he came into my office because his feet felt numb his hands tingled and
his balance was off at first he thought it was just age then he started falling
first once then again the third time he hit his head on the bathroom floor when
I reviewed his supplements I spotted the issue right away he'd been taking a
nerve support formula for over a year the label said it supported brain health
and circulation but inside each tablet 100 m of vitamin B6 and he was taking two
tablets per day that's 200 mgram daily over 10 times the recommended safe upper
limit for seniors now here's the scary part unlike some vitamins that flush out
in your urine B6 builds up in your system over time and in older adults it can
damage the protective coating around your nerves like stripping insulation off a
wire the result tingling numbness muscle weakness tremors even confusion or
memory issues what's worse the symptoms creep in slowly many people think it's
arthritis or aging or early dementia but really it could be B6 toxicity a slow
preventable kind of nerve damage caused by a pill meant to help and it can be
permanent if not caught early mr jenkins was lucky we stopped the supplement and
the damage didn't get worse but he still uses a cane he doesn't drive anymore he
told me "I just wanted to protect my brain i didn't realize I was poisoning it."
Let's be clear vitamin B6 is important but in very small amounts older adults
only need about 2 to 10 milligs per day and that includes what you get from food
but many brain support pills sold online or in stores contain 50 100 even 200
mus that's not just unnecessary it's dangerous so if you're taking any
supplement that says nerve brain or energy check the label know your numbers and
type B6 in the comments if you've taken a supplement like that or know someone
who has now you might be thinking "At least some vitamins like A must be safe
it's just for eyesight right?" Well not exactly let's talk about vitamin A if
you're like most older adults you've probably heard that vitamin A is essential
for good eyesight maybe you've even taken it for your immune system skin health
or because someone said it helps you age gracefully but here's what almost no
one tells you especially if you're over 60 too much vitamin A doesn't just sit
quietly in your system it builds up and over time it can increase pressure
inside your skull mimicking a stroke damaging your vision and even affecting
your brain let me tell you about Miss Dorothy Simmons she was 79 a retired piano
teacher from Oregon she loved music taught students from her living room and
took pride in staying independent but one day she started getting headaches then
came the blurred vision then the dizziness and the slurred speech her family
feared the worst a stroke but when we ran her scans something surprising showed
up no clot no bleeding instead she had elevated intraraanial pressure too much
pressure inside the brain her spinal fluid was backed up tiny veins in her brain
were under stress the cause vitamin A toxicity she'd been taking a highdose skin
and eye supplement for over five years nearly 10,000 IU per day every day
without realizing it here's the key difference vitamin A is fat soluble that
means your body stores it in your liver your tissues even your brain it doesn't
flush out like vitamin C or B and as we age our liver slows down so that buildup
happens even faster when there's too much vitamin A in the body it can lead to a
condition called pseudotumor cerebry a false brain tumor the symptoms: headaches
blurred or double vision dizziness nausea even permanent vision loss or
cognitive decline the tricky part many multivitamins already contain the full
recommended dose of vitamin A but some people like Ms dot unknowingly double or
triple that by adding skin eye or anti-aging formulas on top the safe upper
limit for seniors roughly 2500 to 3,000 IU per day and that's only if needed
under medical supervision but many supplements sold online contain 5,000 *
10,000 IU or more taken daily for months or years it's easy to see how the
damage builds up ms dot is slowly recovering but she now needs regular eye exams
pressure checks and balance therapy she told me "I thought I was doing something
good for my body i never imagined it could hurt my brain." And that's why I
share her story because it's not about scaring anyone it's about making sure you
have the facts so you can protect yourself and your independence now if you
thought eyesight vitamins were risky wait until you hear what happens when a
vitamin meant for cholesterol and heart health suddenly spikes your blood
pressure let's talk about niacin vitamin B3 a vitamin you might have taken or
been told to take for your heart niacin also known as vitamin B3 it's often
praised as a natural way to lower cholesterol some doctors even prescribe it
you'll also find it in heart health supplements energy drinks and fortified
cereals but here's what's often left out of the conversation especially for
older adults niacin in high doses can quietly cause serious swings in your blood
pressure and even trigger a stroke let me introduce you to Mr frank Miller he's
82 a retired postman from Florida he came to see me with a strange mix of
symptoms hot flashes in his face a pounding sensation in his chest dizziness
that came and went every morning his wife thought it was anxiety his son blamed
it on his blood pressure meds but the real cause something no one had thought to
check dennis had been taking an over-the-counter heart-healthy supplement the
front label said "Supports cholesterol and circulation the back 1,000 powers of
nyasin per serving he was taking it twice a day that's 2,000 talon daily over 60
times the amount most seniors actually need here's what happens when you take
niacin in high doses it causes your blood vessels to suddenly expand which is
why your face may flush or feel warm but shortly after those same vessels snap
back and constrict that sudden tightening can raise your blood pressure stress
your heart and reduce blood flow to your brain over time this yo-yo effect is
like tapping a hammer on fragile glass eventually something gives dennis had
what's called a transient eskeemic attack or TIA a mini stroke his speech
slurred for 2 minutes then returned he thought it was a fluke i had to tell him
the hard truth his daily supplement meant to help his heart was quietly harming
his brain and he's not alone many seniors take highdose nasin without even
realizing it they buy flush-free or extended release forms online thinking it's
safer but even those versions can still raise blood pressure trigger atrial
fibrillation and affect blood sugar levels here's what you need to know for
older adults anything above 50 mg of niacin per day should be used only under
medical supervision and if you have high blood pressure heart rhythm issues or
are on medication please check your labels dennis is now off nascin he's
recovering no permanent damage but he told me something I won't forget doc I
thought I was doing everything right i didn't know I was gambling with my brain
so now that we've walked through five common vitamins each with the power to
quietly harm the brain you might be asking what should I take instead or better
yet what should I eat let's talk about real food the kind that protects your
brain without the risks by now you might be wondering "If these vitamins can be
risky what should I do instead?" It's a great question because the truth is your
body wasn't designed to run on pills it was built to thrive on real food whole
natural nutrient-rich food that your brain recognizes absorbs and uses in just
the right amounts let me tell you about Mrs margaret Wilson she's 73 a retired
school principal from Arizona when I first met her she pulled out a drawer full
of supplements vitamin D for bones vitamin E for heart B complex for energy
niacin for cholesterol a multivitamin and a few others for brain support i'm
doing everything right doc she said but she was feeling dizzy in the mornings
her balance was off her blood pressure kept climbing something wasn't adding up
so we did something radical we cleared the clutter one by one we took away the
pills and replaced them with food no magic diet no fancy program just simple
whole foods at the right time in the right combinations here's what her
breakfast looked like one boiled egg for clean protein half an avocado rich in
healthy fats a slice of whole grain toast slow steady energy a handful of
blueberries loaded with brain protective antioxidants a glass of room
temperature water to hydrate the brain sometimes she added a few walnuts or
almonds that's it no powders no pills just food real recognizable nourishing
within just a few weeks Maggie noticed a difference her dizziness faded her
blood pressure stabilized her energy returned and she told me her mind felt
clearer than it had in years here's why it worked your brain needs hydration
healthy fats consistent fuel and micronutrients in their natural form it doesn't
need mega doses it needs balance some of the best foods for older adults include
leafy greens like spinach and kale rich in folate and antioxidants fatty fish
like salmon or sardines full of omega-3s to protect brain cells berries for
polyphenols that reduce inflammation nuts and seeds for vitamin E magnesium and
brain healthy fats whole grains to keep blood sugar stable and support
circulation and remember these foods don't just protect your brain they support
your heart bones mood and mobility too you're not just eating you're healing
with every bite final wakeup call awareness is the best medicine at this stage
in life every choice matters more and the truth is it's not the pills you take
but what you understand about them that truly protects you your body at 60 70 or
80 doesn't process supplements the same way it did decades ago even well-meaning
habits like taking vitamins can quietly backfire if you're not careful that's
why awareness is your most powerful medicine you don't need to fear vitamins but
you do need to respect them read the labels ask your doctor and listen to your
body especially when it whispers if any part of this video spoke to you tell me
in the comments what's one change you'll make starting tomorrow if you found
this helpful give it a like to help others find it too and please subscribe to
Health365 so we can keep learning growing and staying strong together you're not
alone on this journey and you're never too old to take back control of your
health
